All right.
So because we love our instantaneous rate of change so much.
Here are a couple of problems for you to practice.
So first one is find the instantaneous rate of change of half of X equals 3 x plus 1.
So this is your function.
Add the following x values when X equals 4 and when X equals 10.
I'll remind you we're looking for instantaneous rate of change.
All right.
So go ahead and pause a video and give it a shot.
So how do we do this.
Well the only tool we have right now for finding instantaneous rate of change is the definition of a
derivative.
And the definition of a derivative looks like this.
So we have limb of X plus H.
Mine is a VAX
over age as age approaches zero.
So remember this is the definition of a derivative.
And of course to find the way and plug it in.
But if we plug in zero for H We're going to get division by zero.
So that doesn't work.
What we need to do is we need to go ahead and plug in our function 3x plus one into this formula and
then we'll be able to get the limit.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So it's limits of.
So we have f of x plus H.
So we're going to plug in this X plus age into our function here.
So we would be three times x plus H.
Right.
And again x plus H is our input into this function.
So then we do plus one
and then we have minus F X so minus what is f of x is the whole function completely.
All right so that's 3 x plus 1 everything over age as age approaches zero.
So we're going to do is we're going to simplify.
So limit of and remember this 3 gets distributed and X and in the age as well.
So it goes here and it also goes here.
So we multiply three times X is 3x and three times age is 3H plus three age.
Then we have the plus one and then this mine is also distributes in that 3x and in the one negative
times a positive is negative 3 x and again negative as a positive is also a negative.
So that's negative 1 minus 1
over h as age approaches zero.
So we have 3x and we have minus 3x.
So these two cancel out and we have one and then we have minus one.
So those cancel out as well.
What do we have left in the top.
We have 3H And why do we have in the bottom we have h h over H also cancels out.
And in fact let me do it down here just to make it more clean.
Limit of 3H over age as age approaches zero.
So we have h over age goes away.
And remember that the limit of a constant is just the same constant.
So that's three in theory three is our derivative function.
But it turns out that this is a constant function meaning the y value never changes.
What does that tell you that tells you that the instantaneous rate of change everywhere on this function
is always three Arite.
It never changes from three.
And why is this.
Well think about it this is a linear function.
Remember linear functions look like lines and then this is the slope of that line.
This is not even a curve.
So if we had gone two points that lie in this graph and then get the slope of that line it would have
been three as well.
Therefore when X equals 4 and also an X equals 10.
The instantaneous rate of change.
So I R C equals 3 because it never changes.
So everywhere in this function the instantaneous rate of change equals three.
That's not that interesting because again we could have gotten this using slope.
This is not even a curve.
Now let's go into a problem where we do have a curve and we want to find the instantaneous rate of change.
All right so now we need to find the instantaneous rate of change of f of x which equals 3 x squared.
Now we're talking.
This is a curve.
Now we're not dealing with lines anymore.
We're actually finding something useful and we need to find it at the following x values x equals to
X equals 5 x equals 100.
All right so I'll let you go ahead and do your thing.
Pause the video and give it a shot.
All right.
So let's see how you did.
Let's again find the limit using the definition of a derivative.
So we'll just go ahead and plug it in directly.
Which we have limits of of X plus H.
Mine is of X over h as age approaches zero.
This is the definition of the derivative.
So we're going to go ahead and use this function and plug it in right here.
So we have limits of f of x plus H.
So remember again we plug in this X plus H into this function.
So we have three x plus H squared
minus f of x.
So we just take this af of X and put it in 3 x squared over h h approaches zero.
All right.
So we need to expand this X plus H squared.
And how do we do that with foil.
So X plus H times x plus age
we use foil
and foil says you multiply the first X times x is x squared than the outer X times H which is H x then
the enter H times x again which is again H x and then the last.
So h times H is H squared.
All right so now we have a result.
We'll keep doing our limit.
So limit of three times whatever we got here and this H.
X plus H x becomes 2 x.
Right.
Because you have two of them.
So we have three times Expo's age squared which is this x squared plus 2 h x plus H squared minus 3
x squared.
Over age as age approaches zero.
So remember what we're doing here is we're finding our derivative function.
This function gives us our instantaneous rate of change and then we can plug in numbers into that function
and get the instantaneous rate of change at all these different x values in the past problem or derivative
function was a constant.
That means that the rate of change was three everywhere.
In this case we're not going to get a constant We're going to get a function with an X in it.
That means we're going go ahead and plug in all these values.
All right.
And then to finish up.
Let's go ahead and distribute this three into each of these terms are here here and here.
That is going to give us limits of three times x squared is 3 x squared 3 times 2.
X is 6 x plus three times h squared is just 3H squared.
Then minus our 3 x squared
everything over h h approaches zero.
All right so we can always always always.
Every time we do the definition of a derivative eliminate some terms.
So let's get rid of that 3 x squared with this 3 x squared and check it out.
Let's move it over here.
So now we have limits of 6 H.
X plus 3 h squared.
It turns out that we can actually factor the H.
Right because the H is on the top part here and the first term.
And here in the second term.
So we factor out this age what do we have left.
So we took the age from this one.
So we only have six sex
and we factor out the age from this one.
But he was there twice because it was squared so we only have 3 h left plus 3H over age as age approaches
zero.
So check it out.
You always need to cancel out this age at some point doing some sort of factoring.
And that's what we just did.
We got the age out of the top so we can cancel it out with the one at the bottom and finally or limit
is limit of six x plus 3H as age approaches zero.
Check it out.
Now you can actually plug it in and that is going to give you plug in zero for age.
So we have six x plus three times zero.
And that gives you six x.
This right here.
Ladies and gentlemen is your derivative function.
This function is used to determine the rate of change at several different points in the graph.
So what we're going to do now is we're going to take these values and plug them into this function.
So instantaneous rate of change
when X equals to
we're just going to go ahead and plug into into this function.
It's 12 right six times two and since Pena's rate of change at X equals five
we take five and we plug it into our derivative function six times five is 30.
And finally instantaneous rate of change at X equals 100.
We take a hundred and we plug it into our function six times 100 is 600.
And there we go.
We did it.
So we found the instantaneous rate of change for this function at three different x values.
To do that again we use the definition of a derivative.
After that we need to use our function that we're looking for in this formula.
So we have to plug in the X plus H and then minus the original over age etc..
Then you plug in all of that in.
At some point you factor on the top which is what we did here.
We took out the age and that allows you to actually get rid of the denominator.
So you don't have a zero on the bottom anymore.
That gives you this limit which you can use to find the way and plug it in.
We plugged in 0 for H and that gave us our derivative function after we have our derivative function.
All we need to do is plug in these x values right here to two five and 100 into our derivative function
and that will give us the instantaneous rate of change at each of these points for this function f of
x equals 3 x squared OK.
Just reminding you this definition of a derivative is very important.
Now when we started using rules for derivatives you're not going to have to use this.
We're going to have some shortcuts to find derivatives.
But for now this is the tool that we have and that's the one that you need to learn.
And make sure that you know by memory limit of a X plus H minus f of x over h as h approaches zero.
This is said for instantaneous rate of change.
I'll see you in the next tutorial.